Populism in Brazil’s 2018 General Elections: An analysis of Bolsonaro's campaign
speeches ,
12
Eduardo Ryo Tamaki (eduardo.rtamaki@gmail.com)
Mario Fuks (mariofuks@gmail.com)
2019
Paper presented during CECOMP’s (Center for Political Behavior Studies) annual
seminars, on March 21, 2019.
1 This paper is part of the research “Has Demand for Populism Met Supply? An Analysis of Brazil’s 2018
General Elections” carried out within CECOMP (Center for Political Behavior Studies) at UFMG (Federal
University of Minas Gerais), Brazil.
2 For excellent comments and help editing, we thank Kirk Hawkins and Adam Johnson. We are also grateful
to Nina Wiesehomeier for her comments during CECOMP’s seminars in March 2019.
1

Populism in Brazil’s 2018 General Elections: An analysis of Bolsonaro's campaign
speeches
3
Eduardo Ryo Tamaki
Mario Fuks
1. Introduction
With a long history of populist leaders and movements, Latin America is often
considered by scholars to be the land of populism (de la Torre, 2017). In Brazil, as in
other Latin American countries, populism dates back to the middle of the 20th century,
being one of the primary expressions of the predominant personalism in the politics of
the region.
However, in recent years, populism has not attracted much attention from
Brazilian scholars. Despite the lack of scholarly attention, there is reason to suspect that
the last general election in 2018 points to the resurgence of populism in Brazil, aligned
with a global wave of rising populist politicians, such as Donald Trump in the United
States, Viktor Órban in Hungary, Recep Erdogan in Turkey, the "Five Star Movement"
in Italy, or Rodrigo Duterte in the Philippines.
When it comes to the success or failure of populist leaders, the literature tends to
divide explanations into two dimensions: demand and supply. Understanding the demand
for populism is a crucial task if we want to understand how citizens become more likely
to accept and defend populist ideals and, hence, elect populist leaders and parties.
However, the populist attitudes present in a population only have behavioral effects in
specific contexts, where leaders operate as a "catalyst in the activation of populist
attitudes" (Hawkins and Rovira Kaltwasser, 2018b: 15).
The present study focuses on the supply side, leaving the analysis of populist
attitudes in Brazil for a later paper. The study aims to answer the following question: To
what extent is Jair Bolsonaro, the winning candidate of the Brazilian general election of
2018, a populist politician? Among scholars, journalists, and politicians, there is no
3 This paper is part of the research “Has Demand for Populism Met Supply? An Analysis of Brazil’s 2018
General Elections” carried out within CECOMP (Center for Political Behavior Studies) at UFMG (Federal
University of Minas Gerais).
2

consensus on this issue. We intend to answer this question through an analysis of his
campaign speeches.
Preliminary results indicate that Bolsonaro’s campaign speeches presents a mix
of populist with patriotic and nationalist traits. His average score on populism in the
campaign (and even during his first months in office ), is higher than that of the other
4
Brazilian presidents over the past 20 years. But it does not reach the level seen in other
countries with highly populist leaders because elements of patriotic discourse crowd out
the populism in most of his speeches.
The data used for the speech analysis were collected as part of an effort led by
Team Populism, a team of scholars from Europe and the Americas. The speeches were
collected and coded by one of the authors (Eduardo Tamaki) with the assistance of Caio
Marques, a student from IE University, Spain. The present analysis was enriched by Kirk
Hawkins’ comments during the coding process.
The paper proceeds as follows: the first section briefly defines populism according
to the ideational approach; the second section describes the methodology; and the final
section presents our findings and analysis of Bolsonaro’s speeches, starting with an
analysis of scores and complemented by a qualitative analysis of Bolsonaro’s discourse.
2. Populism: Ideational Approach
Populism is not something new. According to authors Norris and Inglehart (2019)
“its historical roots can be traced back to the Chartists in early-Victorian Britain,
Narodnik revolutionaries in late-nineteenth century Tsarist Russia, Fascist movements in
the inter-war decades, Peronism in Argentina, and Poujadism in post-war France” (Norris
and Inglehart, 2019: 4). In modern days, as a political phenomenon, populism has been
receiving attention with the rise of political figures like Trump in the US, Viktor Órban
in Hungary and Andrés Manuel López Obrador in México. Indeed, in 2017 the Cambridge
Dictionary elected ‘populism’ the word of the year .
5
4 Research conducted by Team Populism together with The Guardian where we coded speeches for
Bolsonaro’s first month in office.
5 https://www.cam.ac.uk/news/populism-revealed-as-2017-word-of-the-year-by-cambridge-university-
press
3

However, even though the concept has gathered a lot of attention over the past
year, as the literature points out, it still lacks a consistent definition. Driven by the recent
reemergence of populist forces, scholars around the world have shifted their focus
towards trying to understand populism from its core ideas (Hawkins and Rovira
Kaltwasser, 2018b). According to this approach, all forms of populism share one similar
element: seeing the world as a Manichaean and moral struggle between the good (the
people) and the evil (the conspiring elite).
According to Mudde’s definition (2004), populism frames the world as being
ultimately separated into two different and morally antagonistic groups, “‘the pure
people’ versus ‘the corrupt elite’, and which argues that politics should be an expression
of the volonté générale (general will) of the people” (Mudde, 2004: 543). Therefore,
populism is born of three necessary and sufficient conditions: (i) a Manichaean and moral
cosmology; (ii) the creation and defense of ‘the people’ as a homogenous and virtuous
community; and (iii) the framing of an ‘elite’ as a corrupt and self-serving entity (Aguilar
and Carlin, 2017: 2; Hawkins and Rovira Kaltwasser, 2018b).
As a thin-centered ideology, populism “necessarily appears attached to... other
ideologies” (Mudde and Rovira Kaltwasser, 2017: 6). According to this idea, there is not
a pure manifestation of populism, only subtypes. By uniting itself with other full
ideologies (like socialism and nationalism), populism would result in the creation of
ramifications, which depending on the host, could take different forms. The main
difference between these subtypes would be whom the movement portrays as “the
people” and “the corrupt elite,” as they are malleable and can change according to the
context (Taggart and Rovira Kaltwasser, 2015; Müller, 2016; van Kessel, 2016; Aguilar
and Carlin, 2016; Reinemann et al., 2017; Mudde and Rovira Kaltwasser, 2017; Hawkins
and Rovira Kaltwasser, 2018b).
3. Methodology
Bolsonaro’s speeches were analyzed using a method of textual analysis known as
holistic grading. Unlike other methods of textual analysis, holistic grading asks coders to
interpret whole texts instead of counting content at the level of words and phrases. As
Hawkins (2009) writes: “a holistic approach works by assessing the overall qualities of a
4

text and then assigning a single grade without any intervening calculations” (Hawkins,
2009: 1049).
After designing a rubric, or a simplified guide for the evaluation of speeches, the
coding process and analysis is conducted by two to three coders, with reliability tests
being made along the way to ensure that the results are not the product of luck (Hawkins,
2009). For Bolsonaro’s speeches, Team Populism assigned two coders, both having gone
through training with 44 other coders from The Guardian’s “The New Populism”
project . The group had a high level of intercoder reliability, with correlations around r =
6
0.8.
The rubric produced by Team Populism grades the speeches on a scale that goes
from 0 to 2 . 0 is a speech that uses few if any populist elements, and 2 is a speech that is
7
extremely populist, being very close to the ideal populist discourse (Hawkins, 2009:
1062). A newer version of this scale presented on the project made by Team Populism in
partnership with The Guardian , classifies 0 as “not populist”, 0.5 as “somewhat
8
populist”, 1.0 as “populist”, 1.5 as “very populist” and leaves 2.0 open for what we will
call “perfect populist.”
Regarding the sample of texts, we selected speeches from both official events and
Facebook live streams. With the exception of July (that did not have enough official
discourses), we chose at least two speeches per month: two from August, three from
September, one before the attack against Bolsonaro's life, two after, and four from
October, the month of the elections .
9
4. Results: Quantitative Analysis
We begin by looking at Bolsonaro's score on the populism scale, then we provide
a qualitative analysis of his speeches. Before moving forward, we will briefly discuss the
reliability of the process using Krippendorff's alpha.
6 A project that coded speeches from leaders around the world and produced the “Global Populism
Database”: the “most up-to-date, comprehensive and reliable repository of populist discourse in the world”
according to the Guardian website: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2019/mar/06/how-we-combed-
leaders-speeches-to-gauge-populist-rise
7 For the complete classification and the rubric, see the appendix at the end of the paper.
6 The Guardian Project which produced the “Global Populism Database”
9 For access to the data, ask one of the authors
5

Krippendorff's alpha is a coefficient developed to measure the agreement between
observers, and works to show that the results obtained are not just a product of chance.
According to Krippendorff (2011), "perfect reliability" would be indicated by an α = 1,
and the absence of any reliability by α = 0. We chose this method because it applies to
any number of observers, categories, scale values or measures, and can also use nominal
and ordinal data, as well as intervals (Krippendorff, 2011) .
10
For the campaign speeches, we obtained an α = 0.88. According to Krippendorff,
for the social sciences, we should only rely on variables that present reliability above α =
0.8. Variables with reliability between α = 0.667 and α = 0.8 should be used only for
"drawing tentative conclusions" (Krippendorff, 2004: p. 241). Since our α is higher than
0.8, we can assume that our data and analysis are not a product of luck, and therefore are
trustworthy.
Table 1 Speech Scores
Coder Coder Average /
Date Title
A B Final Score
1- PSL conference: Official
July 7, 2018 0.4 0.5 0.5 launch of his candidacy for
President
August 23, 2 - Bolsonaro’s speech at
0.6 0.5 0.6
2018 Araçatuba
August 31, 3 - Bolsonaro’s speech at Porto
0.1 0 0.0
2018 Velho, Roraima
4 - Speech at the Business and
September 6,
0.3 0.2 0.3 Commercial association at Rio de
2018
Janeiro
September
0.3 0.3 0.3 5 - Speech after being stabbed
16, 2018
September 6 - Speech at Avenida Paulista
0.5 0.3 0.4
30, 2018 (September)
October 6, 7 - Speech one day before the
0.3 0.2 0.3
2018 first round of elections
10 For more information on Krippendorff’s alpha, see Krippendorff, K., 2011.
6

October 16, 8 - Speech right after the first
0.7 0.6 0.7
2018 round of elections
October 22, 9 - Speech at Avenida Paulista
1 0.8 0.9
2018 (October)
10 - Speech the day before
October 27,
0.8 1 0.9 second round elections (Live on
2018
Facebook)
Total
0.5 0.44 0.5
Average
Source: Author calculations; the sources of the speeches are in the Appendix.
Table 1 presents the individual score given to each discourse, by each coder, and
their average score. A quick analysis shows that Bolsonaro's speeches present a growing
level of populism. His campaign begins with an average populist score of 0.5 and ends
with an average of 0.9, an increase of 100%. As shown above, his discourse becomes
more populist as elections approach (between the seventh and eighth speech). The graphic
below helps illustrate this progression.
7

Graphic 1
Progression of Populism on Bolsonaro's Campaign Speeches
0.9 0.9
0.7
0.6
e
ro
c
S 0.5
0.4
0.3
0.3 0.3
0.1
July 7 Aug 23 Aug 31 Sept 6 Sept 16 Sept 30 Oct 6 Oct 16 Oct 22 Oct 27
Date
Average of Populism on Bolsonaro's Speeches Total Average
Source: Research “Has demand met supply? An analysis of Bolsonaro’s speeches in Brazilian elections”
In addition, there is a turning point in his speeches, highlighted by the red line,
which is the first round of the elections. In this case, we can see that after the first round
of elections (October 7) his discourse became gradually more populist going from an
average 0.3 on October 6, to a 0.9 on October 27, one day before the second round.
Table 2, on the other hand, exhibits the average scores of other Brazilian
presidents over the past 24 years, as well as other international leaders.
Table 2
Leaders Term Average / Total Score
Luis Ignácio Lula da Silva 2003 – 2011 0.3
Dilma Rousseff 2011 – 2016 0.2
Michel Temer 2016 – 2018 0
Fernando Henrique Cardoso 1995 – 2003 0
8

International Leaders
Hugo Chávez 1999 – 2013 1.8
Donald Trump 2017 – today 0.8
Source: Data produced by Team Populism
Unlike past presidents Michel Temer, Dilma Rousseff, Lula, and Fernando
Henrique Cardoso, Bolsonaro articulates stronger populist elements and uses them more
often; he is the first, in over 20 years, to score at least 0.5. His predecessors’ average
scores vary from 0 to 0.3, not enough to be considered populist.
In reference to Lula, with an average score of 0.3, Hawkins (2009) writes:
… none of his speeches have much in the way of a Manichaean
quality. Instead, Lula tends to focus on narrow issues and avoids
any kind of cosmic proportionality or the mention of historical
figures. He consistently emphasizes consensus and negotiation and,
while briefly criticizing some individuals or opposition groups
(e.g., former president Cardoso and wealthy Brazilians), he avoids
characterizing these as evil. He does make brief mention of a
popular will in some of his speeches, reminding the audience of his
own working-class origins and telling them that he understands
their needs (Hawkins, 2009: 1056).
Dilma's speeches, with an average score of 0.2, focus on specific issues, and most of the
time do not frame her opponents as being the evil. However, by the end of her second
term, during the process of impeachment, she starts to make constant references to
enemies that might be conspiring against her, subverting the system, and usurping the
power that the people gave to her. Temer and Cardoso, with an average score of 0, do not
require any detailed analysis since their scores are a clear indicator of the absence or
insignificant presence of populist elements in their discourses.
The second part of table 2 (international leaders) allows us to compare
Bolsonaro’s score with Hugo Chávez and Trump, other leaders considered to be populist.
In contrast to them, Bolsonaro's levels of populism are low. We believe that this is due to
the strong presence of patriotic and nationalist traits in his speeches, which we will
explain in the next section.
Chávez, with an average score of 1.8, presents an actively populist discourse. It
comes close to what is considered the "perfect populism." It displays a moral and
Manichaean division between the good and the evil with cosmic proportions. It praises
9

the popular will and the "people" as the true sovereigns and frames the elite as being the
enemy responsible for subverting the system and harming the people.
Trump presents an average score of 0.8, closer to Bolsonaro’s score. Although he
displays a Manichaean vision of politics and the world, praises the "people", and is
consistently against the political elite that were in power before his election, he is
inconsistent, as Hawkins and Rovira Kaltwasser (2018) and a recent article published by
The Guardian reveals.
11
It is necessary to highlight that the present research works only with campaign
speeches, not Bolsonaro’s speeches in office. Also, the campaign speeches selected were
given at different places, on different platforms, and to different audiences, so they might
present different framing effects that one should take into account.
Even with our analyses being limited to the campaign, Bolsonaro speeches bring
to the political scene something that has been missing from Brazil for a very long time:
populism. Nonetheless, Bolsonaro’s average score indicates that he is not a perfect or
pure populist. In the next section, we present passages from his campaign speeches that
sustain our affirmation and show elements from patriotism that prevents him from scoring
higher. We will also show some of his nationalist traits, but not classify him as an
"ethnopopulist," as we will explain.
5. Qualitative Analysis: The Populism on Bolsonaro
The qualitative analysis focuses on the three principal dimensions of the ideational
approach (Hawkins and Rovira Kaltwasser, 2018b): (i) the praise of the popular will or
the “people”; (ii) the framing of an elite as corrupt and selfish; and (iii) a Manichaean
vision of politics and the world. Here we illustrate each dimension with a few passages
from Bolsonaro’s speeches; however, we would like to highlight that, as we utilize the
holistic approach, discourses are analyzed as a whole, not dividing them into separate
parts. Subsequently, we highlight elements of nationalism and patriotism in his speech,
further explaining why these traits are incompatible with populism in the case of
Bolsonaro.
11 https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2019/mar/07/the-teleprompter-test-why-trumps-
populism-is-often-scripted
10

The People, The Good
One of the main dimensions of populism is the belief and praise of popular
sovereignty. The “popular will” is the highest principle possible and should be respected
and followed above all.
We are indeed different from those who ruled over us over the past 20
years – PT and PSDB. With us, you will be in the first place; you will
be our bosses! Together we can change Brazil; we won’t have another
opportunity!
12
Nevertheless, the “people” which populism refers to is something
malleable; it is a group that changes and reshapes according to the context
(Reinemann et al., 2017). In Bolsonaro’s campaign, he builds “people” from
a cultural perspective, from values and traditional religion.
Brazil is ours, “good citizens”, workers, right-wings, Christians that
preserve family values; that don’t want gender ideology in
classrooms; that want Brazil doing business with the entire world,
without an ideological bias
13
He uses the words “we” and “our” to highlight his identification with popular ideas
mainly among his supporters, which in principle, could reflect an attempt to build on a
populist homogeneous people and their “imagined community.” However, the “people”
occupies a secondary position in Bolsonaro’s discourse. Its use is inconsistent and most
of the times implicit, playing a supporting role to other preferred terms (e.g., “Brazilians,”
“our country,” “our nation,” “(our) Brazil”). Therefore, the “people” ends up
overshadowed by other elements that do not suit this people-centrism, which we will soon
discuss.
The Elite, The Enemy
Besides people-centrism, in order to classify someone as a populist, it is necessary
that their speech frames an elite as being morally evil and responsible for conspiring
against the people to usurp their power. This elite is a group characterized as the source
of all “evil,” being selfish and corrupt. According to Hofstadter (1996): “this enemy is
12 Bolsonaro (2) – Araçatuba, 2018
13 Bolsonaro (9) – Av. Paulista (October), 2018
11

clearly delineated: he is a perfect model of malice, a kind of amoral superman: sinister,
ubiquitous, powerful, cruel, sensual, luxury-loving” (Hofstadter, 1996, as cited in
Hawkins, 2009: 1044).
In his campaign discourses, Bolsonaro openly acknowledges the opposition (the
left and PT) as being his enemies. He frames the PT government as corrupt, inefficient,
and responsible for executing a plan to spread its ideology while in power. In addition,
Bolsonaro holds PT accountable for the undermining of the traditional family and its
values. Bolsonaro uses belligerent language when addressing PT and becomes more
aggressive as the elections approach. He even defends non-democratic means to defeat
his political enemy.
Petralhada, you will all go to the edge of the beach , you won’t
14 15
have any more shots in our homeland, because I will cut off all of your
luxuries. You won’t have any more NGO’s to satisfy your hunger for
mortadella . It will be a purge never seen in the history of Brazil!
16 17
At times, populists might build “the enemy” in a certain way that ends up not
being explicit. However, it might be possible to identify “the enemy” by analyzing the
communicative context (Reinemann et al., 2017). In the following example, it is possible
to determine that the enemy is the PT:
No one is going to leave this homeland, because this homeland is ours
[and] not from this gang that has a red flag and “brain-washed”
[sic]
18
Manichaean Division
Praise of popular sovereignty and identifying an enemy are both necessary
characteristics of populism, but not sufficient to classify someone as a populist. A populist
speech also depends on the presence of a framing that divides the world into two morally
opposed poles: the good and the evil.
14 Reference to people affiliated to PT, a wordplay with the words “Metralha” from Brothers Metralha
(mobsters) + Petista (member of PT)
15 Reference to a place where political prisoners were taken during the military dictatorship
16 Leftists activists are also called “bun with mortadella”
17 Bolsonaro (9) – Av. Paulista (October), 2018
18 Bolsoarno (9) – Av. Paulista (October), 2018
12

But right now is polarized: it’s us and the PT; it’s the Brazil green
and yellow, and them, that represent Cuba, represent the Venezuelan
government, with its flag that is red with a hammer and scythe on top
of it. Let’s change Brazil!
19
For Bolsonaro there is a moral distinction between those who “defend the
traditional family and values” and those who oppose it.
After all we are left with only two paths: the one of prosperity, liberty,
family, of being by the side of God, by the side of those who have a
religion and those who do not have, but are also competent [sic]; and
the other we are left with the Venezuelan way. We don’t want that for
our Brazil. The other candidate [the one from PT], we know who
surrounds him and who he seeks advise with and where. We don’t
want the return of that kind of people to the Palácio do Planalto [The
Presidential Palace]
20
Even when Bolsonaro does not talk explicitly, his use of certain expressions (e.g.,
“our side and their side,” “good citizens”) denotes the existence of a moral division:
The other side is the return of the past, is the corruption, the lies, the
contempt of family, is the approximation of dictatorships
21
He sees and treats the opposition as the enemy of the people, and there is no in-
between: either you are with them, or you are against them.
You, Petralhas, will see a Civil, and Military police with legal
rearguard to make the law to uphold law on your back. Bandit from
MST , bandit from MTST , your actions will be typified as terrorism;
22 23
you will not spread more terror the countryside and the cities! Either
you fit in and fall in line or you will keep company to the “drunkard”
in Curitiba!
24
19 Bolsonaro (7) – One day before first round, 2018
20 Bolsonaro (8) – Right after the first round of elections, 2018
21 Bolsonaro (10) – Day before second round of elections, 2018
22 Homeless Movement
23 Homeless Workers Movement
24 Bolsonaro (9) – Av. Paulista (October), 2018
13

Although it is present, the Manichaean division is not constant. At times, likely as
a reaction to critics to his campaign, his speeches highlight the unity of the Brazilian
society:
Let’s unite white and black, straight and homo, also Trans, there is no
problem, everyone does whatever it wants, be happy [sic]. Let’s unite
northeasterners and southerners, we are going to silence these small
separatist movements that we see in Brazil, unite rich and poor… Let’s
unite employers and employees, not boost the discord between them.
Indeed, one needs the other
25
Patriotism and Nationalism
Although it contains the main elements of populism, Bolsonaro’s discourse does
not score high on the populism scale. This is mainly because his speech also contains
patriotic and nationalist traits that are not consistent with his populism. Patriotism and
nationalism are not necessarily incompatible with populism; it is possible to identify
subtypes of populism that derive from interactions among these discourses. Norris and
Inglehart (2019), for instance, classify Trump’s populism as an authoritarian populism.
That is not the case for Bolsonaro. His patriotism and nationalism do not combine but
compete with populism, leaving considerably less room for the “people” in his discourse.
Both patriotic and populist speeches can present a Manichaean vision of the world
and politics, and they both may present anti-elite rhetoric. The main difference is that
patriotism, unlike populism, emphasizes the state. As Hawkins, Amado, and Cranney
(2010) state: “The state has an existence that is more independent of the individuals in it.
We must all revere the state, and the state in turn protects and blesses us, but no one of us
is a bearer of the state in the same way that we are the bearers of our national identity”
(Hawkins, Amado, and Cranney, 2010: 14). As O’Donnell (1979) writes, the state stands
above society. In short, nothing is above the state (Hawkins, Amado, and Cranney, 2010).
It goes beyond territory and institutions and rather has to do with traditions, values, and
symbols like the national anthem, the flag, and its colors. Not coincidentally, Bolsonaro’s
campaign motto was “Brazil above everything, God above all.”
25 Bolsonaro (1) – Official launch of his candidacy for President, 2018
14

Overall Bolsonaro’s campaign does not claim to be the agent of the people or the
guardian of the popular will, but rather the savior of Brazil, the protector of the nation
and the state against the enemy that has been in power for ten years. However, it is not
clear whether he is talking about "the nation" or "the state" - sometimes it can be either.
According to Jenne, Hawkins, and Castanho Silva (2010), nationalist discourse, restricts
the boundaries of a sovereign ethnos to that of the group considered the national
dominant. Thus, "when political actors utilize national rhetoric, this has the effect of re-
inforcing or adjusting these boundaries in the public imagination" (Jenne, Hawkins, and
Castanho Silva, 2019: 8).
Drawing from these ideas and the nationalism rubric of Jenne, Hawkins, and
Castanho Silva , we identified the presence of patriotic and nationalist traits in
26
Bolsonaro's speeches. First, there is subtle praise of the virtues and distinctiveness of what
he identifies as the "core nation":
We the Brazilian people (Brasileiros) say that there is something
more, way more important than our lives: our freedom! Because men
or women arrested, have no life! With your strength, let's make Brazil!
I am here because I believe in you, you are here because you believe
in Brasil, this Brasil is ours! Our flag is green and yellow! [sic]
27
And what I want, if that’s God’s will, is from next year’s January, not
to be a captain of the army anymore, but to be a soldier of our Brazil
[sic]
28
I’m here because I believe in you, you are here because you believe in
Brazil!
29
Table 3 helps illustrate this difference:
Table 3
Populism Patriotism Nationalism
The greatest value The people The State The nation
26 For the complete classification and the rubric, see the appendix at the end of the paper.
27 Bolsonaro (1) – Official launch of his candidacy for President.
28 Bolsonaro (2) – Araçatuba, 2018
29 Bolsonaro (9) – Av. Paulista (October), 2018
15

Agent of the Savior of the
The leader is Protector of the State
people Nation
Source: author’s elaboration
Ultimately, the core element of Bolsonaro’s speeches is not the people, but the
state and the nation. Terms like “Brazil,” “our flag,” and “nation” are repeatedly used,
leaving comparatively less room for the “people”. “We” and “the people” are
interchangeable with “the nation.” Bolsonaro also makes repeated references to the name
of the nation, “Brazil.” It is worth mentioning that we believe that he does that mostly
because words like "people" are heavily linked to the left, to the PT - his main opposition
- so this might be a strategy to distance himself from what he frames as the "enemies."
I know what is at stake in this approaching moment: is the destiny of
this great nation called Brazil.
30
[Voting for Bolsonaro] You are saving mine, yours, our Brazil!
31
We are only one country, one homeland, only one nation, only one
green and yellow heart. Together we can really make Brazil a great
nation [sic]
32
There is also the presence of a rhetorical frame that argues for protecting the status
of the national group to save the whole nation (Jenne, Hawkins, and Castanho Silva,
2019). The group he references, as we could see in the previous quotes, is not currently
the politically dominant, but the real Brazilians who are, in a profoundly conservative
way, in favor of the traditional family.
We have fought against fascism, and we are fighting PT now, which
is a fascist party. They lie and try to blame me for things that are their
faults [sic].
33
As shown, there are a few nationalist and patriotic elements in his discourse.
However, even though they coexist with populism in his discourse, they do not combine
to form something like “ethnopopulism” or “patriotic populism.” This does not mean that
30 Bolsonaro (1) – Official launch of his candidacy for President.
33 Bolsonaro (1) – Official launch of his candidacy for President.
16

populism is absent from Bolsonaro’s campaign speeches. On the contrary, scoring 0.5
means he is “somewhat populist,” for making use of all the populist elements, even
though at times he uses them inconsistently or with low intensity. We classified Bolsonaro
as “somewhat populist” because, even though the populist elements are present in his
speeches, “people-centrism” is inconsistent, as illustrated by our analysis.
6. Concluding Remarks
In light of all the data analyzed, is it possible to say that Bolsonaro is a populist
leader? The analysis indicates that, besides presenting a low average populist score of 0.5,
Bolsonaro’s campaign speech presents all three main dimensions constitutive of
populism. As Mudde and Rovira Kaltwasser (2013) state, the peculiarity of populism as
a set of ideas lies precisely in the combination of these three elements.
However, Bolsonaro is far from being a “perfect populist”. The patriotic and
nationalist elements in his discourses eclipse the “people”, thus his populist score ends
up being lower than one might expect.
It is also important to highlight that the analysis that we made here is limited to
his presidential campaign and should not be used to draw any final profile regarding his
ongoing term as president. As Hawkins, Amado, and Cranney (2010) argue, campaign
speeches may present more populism than do speeches in government and vice versa,
since both frame conditions and external contexts are prone to change. We also believe
that discourses given on different platforms may present different levels of populism since
they have been designed for different audiences and therefore may have been written for
different purposes (Wiesehomeier, 2018).
Our research is still in its initial stages. The next step would be to expand our
analysis to cover Bolsonaro as president . Initial research by Team Populism and The
34
Guardian revealed that he maintained a score of 0.5 even after elected, so, compared with
other Brazilian presidents (Temer, Dilma, Lula, and Cardoso), it is possible to see that, in
his first months in office, he already scores higher than that of his predecessors.
34 Which is already being made, for more details email the authors.
17

Finally, we believe that examining Bolsanaro’s speeches is the first step towards
a better understanding of what happened in Brazil in the polarized 2018 general elections.
Brazil might be a case in which demand for populism meets supply, but this can only be
understood by comparing the supply of populists with the demand for populism among
voters; this will require an analysis of public opinion data. We hope that our research can
contribute to the debate about populism and its different manifestations both in Brazil and
in the rest of the world.
18

References
AGUILAR, Rosario; and CARLIN, Ryan. Ideational Populism in Chile? A Case
Study. Swiss Political Science Review. Vol. 23, No. 4, p. 404 – 422. 2017.
DE LA TORRE, Carlos. Populism in Latin America. In: ROVIRA KALTWASSER,
Cristóbal; TAGGART, Paul; ESPEJO, Paulina O.; e OSTIGUY, Pierre (Org.):
The Oxford Handbook of Populism. Oxford University Press. Chapter 10. 2017.
HAWKINS, Kirk A. Is Chávez Populist? Measuring Populist Discourse in
Comparative Perspective. Comparative Political Studies. SAGE pub. Vol. 42,
No. 8, p. 1040 – 1067. 2009.
HAWKINS, Kirk A.; AMADO, Mayavel; and CRANNEY, Stephen. Beyond Populism:
A Typology of Elite Political Discourse with Some Examples. Paper presented
at the American Political Science Association (APSA). 2010.
HAWKINS, Kirk A.; and ROVIRA KALTWASSER, Cristóbal. Measuring Populist
Discourse in the United States and Beyond. Nature Human Behaviour.
Macmillan Publishers Limited. 2018.
HAWKINS, Kirk A.; and ROVIRA KALTWASSER, Cristóbal. Introduction: the
ideational approach. In: HAWKINS, Kirk A.; CARLIN, Ryan; LITTVAY, Levi;
e ROVIRA KALTWASSER, Cristóbal (Org.): The Ideational Approach to
Populism: Concept, Theory, and Method. Routledge. New York, NY.
Introduction, p. 1 – 41. 2018b.
JENNE, Erin; HAWKINS, Kirk A.; and CASTANHO SILVA; Bruno. Closing
Sovereign Space: Mapping the Intersection of Populist and Nationalist
Discourse across Thirty-six European States. 2010.
JENNE, Erin; HAWKINS, Kirk A.; and CASTANHO SILVA; Bruno. What’s in a
Speech? Mapping Populist and Nationalist Rhetoric of Government Leaders
Across Europe and North America. Presented at APSA Annual Meeting 2019.
2019.
KRIPPENDORFF, Klaus. Computing Krippendorff's Alpha-Reliability.
Departamental Papers, University of Pennsylvania, Scholarly Commons. 2011.
KRIPPENDORFF, Klaus. Content Analysis: An Introduction to its Methodology. 2
Ed. Sage Publications. Thousand Oaks, California. Chapter 11, p. 211 – 257. 2004.
MUDDE, Cas. The Populist Zeitgeist. Government and Opposition, Cambridge
University Press, Vol. 39, No. 4, p. 541 – 562. 24 p. 2004.
MUDDE, Cas; and ROVIRA KALTWASSER, Cristóbal. Populism. In: FREEDEN,
Michael; and STEARS, Marc (Ed.): The Oxford Handbook of Political
Ideologies. Oxford University Press. 2013.
MUDDE, Cas; and ROVIRA KALTWASSER, Cristóbal. Populism: A Very Short
Introduction. Oxford University Press. New York, NY. 2017.
MÜLLER, Jan-Werner. What is Populism? University of Pennsylvania Press.
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Introduction and Chapter. 1, p. 8 – 40. 2016.
19

NORRIS, Pippa; and INGLEHART, Ronald. Cultural Backlash: Trump, Brexit, and
Authoritarian Populism. Cambridge University Press. Camdbrige. United
Kingdom. Chapter 1, 2 and 3. P. 3 – 86. 2019.
O’DONNEL, Guillermo. Tensions in the Bureaucratic-Authoritarian State and the
Question of Democracy. In: COLLIER, David (Ed.): The New
Authoritarianism in Latin America. Princeton University Press. Chapter 7, p.
285 – 318. 1979.
REINEMANN, Carsten; AALBERG, Toril; ESSER, Frank; STRÖMBÄCK, Jesper; and
VREESE, Claes H.; Populist Political Communication: Toward a Model of Its
Causes, Forms, and Effects. In: AALBERT, Toril; ESSER, Frank;
REINEMANN, Carsten; STRÖMBÄCK, Jesper; VREESE, Claes H. (Ed.):
Populist Political Communication in Europe. Routledge. New York, NY. Part
1, 2, p. 12 – 29. 2017.
TAGGART, Paul; and ROVIRA KALTWASSER, Cristóbal. Dealing With Populists in
Government: Some Comparative Conclusions. Democratization. Taylor &
Francis. 2015.
VAN KESSEL, Stijn. The Surge of ‘Exclusionary’ Populism in Europe. Comparative
Politics Newsletter. Vol. 26, No. 2. P. 81 – 86. 2016.
WIESEHOMEIER, Nina. Expert Surveys. In: HAWKINS, Kirk A.; CARLIN, Ryan;
LITTVAY, Levi; and ROVIRA KALTWASSER, Cristóbal (Org.): The
Ideational Approach to Populism: Concept, Theory, and Method. Routledge.
New York, NY. Chapter 4, p. 90 – 112. 2018.
20

Appendix 1
Populist Speech Rubric
Country:
Leader:
Title of Speech:
Date of Speech:
Category:
Grader:
Date of grading:
Final Grade (delete unused grades):
2 A speech in this category is extremely populist and comes very close to the ideal
populist discourse. Specifically, the speech expresses all or nearly all of the elements of
ideal populist discourse, and has few elements that would be considered non-populist.
1 A speech in this category includes strong, clearly populist elements but either does
not use them consistently or tempers them by including non-populist elements. Thus, the
discourse may have a romanticized notion of the people and the idea of a unified popular
will (indeed, it must in order to be considered populist), but it avoids bellicose language
or references to cosmic proportions or any particular enemy.
0 A speech in this category uses few if any populist elements. Note, that even if a
speech expresses a Manichaean worldview, it is not considered populist if it lacks some
notion of a popular will.
Populist Pluralist
21

It conveys a Manichaean vision of the world, The discourse does not frame issues in moral
that is, one that is moral (every issue has a terms or paint them in black-and-white.
strong moral dimension) and dualistic Instead, there is a strong tendency to focus on
(everything is in one category or the other, narrow, particular issues. The discourse
“right” or “wrong,” “good” or “evil”) The will emphasize or at least not eliminate the
implication—or even the stated idea—is that possibility of natural, justifiable differences
there can be nothing in between, no fence- of opinion.
sitting, no shades of grey. This leads to the use
of highly charged, even bellicose language.
The moral significance of the items The discourse will probably not refer to any
mentioned in the speech is heightened by reified notion of history or use any cosmic
ascribing cosmic proportions to them, that proportions. References to the spatial and
is, by claiming that they affect people temporal consequences of issues will be
everywhere (possibly but not necessarily limited to the material reality rather than any
across the world) and across time. Especially mystical connections.
in this last regard, frequent references may be
made to a reified notion of “history.” At the
same time, the speaker will justify the moral
significance of his or her ideas by tying them
to national and religious leaders that are
generally revered.
22

Although Manichaean, the discourse is still Democracy is simply the calculation of votes.
democratic, in the sense that the good is This should be respected and is seen as the
embodied in the will of the majority, which is foundation of legitimate government, but it is
seen as a unified whole, perhaps but not not meant to be an exercise in arriving at a
necessarily expressed in references to the preexisting, knowable “will.” The majority
“voluntad del pueblo”; however, the speaker shifts and changes across issues. The common
ascribes a kind of unchanging essentialism to man is not romanticized, and the notion of
that will, rather than letting it be whatever 50 citizenship is broad and legalistic.
percent of the people want at any particular
moment. Thus, this good majority is
romanticized, with some notion of the
common man (urban or rural) seen as the
embodiment of the national ideal.
The evil is embodied in a minority whose The discourse avoids a conspiratorial tone
specific identity will vary according to and does not single out any evil ruling
context. Domestically, in Latin America it is minority. It avoids labeling opponents as
often an economic elite, perhaps the evil and may not even mention them in an
“oligarchy,” but it may also be a racial elite; effort to maintain a positive tone and keep
internationally, it may be the United States or passions low.
the capitalist, industrialized nations or
international financiers or simply an ideology
such as neoliberalism and capitalism.
Crucially, the evil minority is or was recently The discourse does not argue for systemic
in charge and subverted the system to its own change but, as mentioned above, focuses on
interests, against those of the good majority or particular issues. In the words of Laclau, it is
the people. Thus, systemic change is/was a politics of “differences” rather than
required, often expressed in terms such as “hegemony.”
“revolution” or “liberation” of the people
from their “immiseration” or bondage, even if
technically it comes about through elections.
23

Because of the moral baseness of the Formal rights and liberties are openly
threatening minority, non-democratic means respected, and the opposition is treated with
may be openly justified or at least the courtesy and as a legitimate political actor.
minority’s continued enjoyment of these will The discourse will not encourage or justify
be seen as a generous concession by the illegal, violent actions. There will be great
people; the speech itself may exaggerate or respect for institutions and the rule of law. If
abuse data to make this point, and the data is abused, it is either an innocent mistake
language will show a bellicosity towards the or an embarrassing breach of democratic
opposition that is incendiary and standards.
condescending, lacking the decorum that one
shows a worthy opponent.
Source: Team Populism
24

Appendix 2
Criteria for Selecting Speeches
Generally, we need a speech that is at least 2-3 pages long, or about 2,000 words, in order
to have enough text to analyze. We will use an extremely long speech (>5 pages) if it is
the only one available in the category or is clearly the right speech for that category (as
in the case of a famous speech), but given a choice, we prefer something shorter to make
our work a little easier. We will also use an extremely short speech (1 page or less), but
only if it is the only speech available. When the leader has been in office several years
(for example it is the last year in a 6-year term) and there are a variety of speeches
available for a category, we generally prefer the most recent ones because they are the
easiest to find. To ensure comparability of coding across speeches and leaders, we need
to have transcriptions rather than video recordings.
Campaign
Here we ask for a speech given during this chief executive’s latest campaign for office.
Keep in mind the above criteria, especially length. Campaign speeches are often the
hardest to find because they were given before the person was elected, and so they are
usually not recorded on any government website. Be prepared to call the political party
or the office of the chief executive to speak to someone who was involved in the
campaign. If it is impossible to get a speech for the person’s own campaign, we will take
a speech that he/she gave for some other candidate’s campaign (for example, for members
of the legislature during a mid-term election). If several speeches are available, we prefer
the closing speech of the campaign to the opening speech, and a speech given to a large
public audience over one given at a party convention.
Ribbon-cutting
This is a speech given at some kind of public ceremony dedicating a government building
or project, typically a road, park, or building. You will likely find a number of these on
the government website. Given a choice, look for a speech that is given to a small, local
25

audience rather than a national one, and to a domestic audience rather than an
international one—we prefer something obscure in order to see whether the chief
executive uses a populist discourse in settings with little apparent significance. If you
have a lot to choose from, pick the most recent.
International
Here we are looking for a speech whose primary audience, or a significant part of the
audience, consists of citizens from other countries—leaders, diplomats, or even ordinary
people. There will be quite a few international speeches available, including on non-
government websites. For consistency, we encourage you to look for a speech given
outside the country, with as small of a domestic audience as possible. UN speeches are
especially good as long as they are long enough.
Famous or most popular
In this category, we seek for a speech that is widely regarded as one of the best-known
and most-popular speeches given by this leader. Of course, some leaders don’t give very
popular speeches, but we at least want one of their best-known speeches. As someone
who knows this country well, you are in a good position to pick what you think is a
particularly appropriate speech. We encourage you to contact the office of the chief
executive or the political party and ask them for a recommendation. They will often
suggest an inaugural speech (when the chief executive actually took office) or an annual
report to the nation, but not necessarily. You should not feel obliged to use one of these
particular speeches if you know of another one that is more famous (or notorious). Talk
to a couple of people if you feel unsure.
Source: Team Populism
26

Appendix 3
Source from Bolsonaro’s Speeches
Data Discurso Fonte
1- PSL conference: Official Youtube (Link to
July 7, 2018 launch of his candidacy for be included)
President
2 - Bolsonaro’s speech at Youtube (Link to
August 23, 2018
Araçatuba be included)
3 - Bolsonaro’s speech at Porto Youtube (Link to
August 31, 2018
Velho, Roraima be included)
4 - Speech at the Business and Youtube (Link to
September 6, 2018 Commercial association at Rio be included)
de Janeiro
Youtube (Link to
September 16, 2018 5 - Speech after being stabbed
be included)
6 - Speech at Avenida Paulista Youtube (Link to
September 30, 2018
(September) be included)
Facebook Live
7 - Speech one day before the
October 6, 2018 (Link to be
first round of elections
included)
Facebook Live
8 - Speech right after the first
October 16, 2018 (Link to be
round of elections
included)
Facebook Live
9 - Speech at Avenida Paulista
October 22, 2018 (Link to be
(October)
included)
10 - Speech the day before Facebook Live
October 27, 2018 second round elections (Live on (Link to be
Facebook) included)
Source: author’s production. Links will be included in next versions, for now, if there is a need,
request the files from the authors
27

Appendix 4
Nationalism Speech Rubric
Country:
Name of speaker:
Title of Speech:
Date of speech:
Type of speech:
Place of speech:
Year of Election:
Grader:
Date of Grading:
Grade:
1.________ Elevate the “National Self” (0, .5, 1);
2.________Defend against “National Others” (0, .5, 1)
_________ Final Grade (add scores on above two components)
A score of 1 on either element means all or most of that element of nationalism is present
in the speech; a score of 0 means none or almost none of that element is present in the
speech; .5 implies a mix of the two.
28

Nationalism Cosmpolitanism/ Multiculturalism/No
Nationalism
ELEVATE OR PROTECT THE
“NATIONAL SELF’
The discourse of nationalism or dominant
No references to pain or trauma of the
nationhood extolls the virtues and
nation, nor to lost glory. No elevation of the
distinctiveness of the core nation and
special virtues and importance of the nation.
proclaims their past triumphs and victories,
No calls for status reversal.
and/or prioritizes its health and future
well-being. There may be considerable
sentimentality associated with these claims.
Minimal references to national heroes or
legacy.
Nationalist discourse is often peppered with
family metaphors like “brothers,”
There may be a complete absence of “nation
“motherland,” “homeland” or “founding
talk” except insofar as “nations” are taken
fathers.” References may be made to the
to mean states. If the “we” or “self” is the
historical pain and trauma caused by
global community, this is particularly non-
national defeats. There may be references to
nationalist.
national heroes or key turning points in
national history.
Little focus on sovereignty concerns.
Calls for restoring the nation to its rightful
position, at home and abroad (ethnic kin).
May be references to importance of national
sovereignty and self-determination.
29

DEFEND AGAINST “NATIONAL
OTHERS”
This discourse is focused on the purported
Few if any negative references to national
threat posed by minorities or “national
others. No overriding conceptualization of
others” outside or inside the state
world as patchwork of nations.
Externally, threats may take the form of
Problems in foreign affairs are rarely
foreign (sometimes “enemy”) nations,
framed as conflicts between antagonistic
international organizations (UN or EU) or
nations. Problems can be solved by
anti-national elites perceived to be aligned
capitalizing on common global interests,
against the nation. Anti-colonialist rhetoric
possibly through international
(“colony,” “empire,” “subjugation”) may
organizations.
feature here, but the perceived threat must
be framed in national terms.
Nations and groups may be stereotyped.
Ethnic and national stereotyping should
In more extreme versions, the discourse may
be low.
focus on threat to the nation posed by
migrants, immigrants or refugees or on
threats posed by historical minorities with a
No dominant nation with subordinate status
long history in the state. Some minorities
for minorities. No identification of threats
may be framed as potential fifth columns or
to national integrity. There may be calls to
Trojan Horses for hostile outside actors.
integrate minorities, accept deserving
“National others” may also include disloyal
immigrants and/or work together with
citizens or traitors, who serve as a conduit
nations around the world.
for the influence of hostile outside forces.
30

Source: Jenne, Hawkins, and Castanho Silva, 2019.
31