Speaker 1  0:00  
Hi. This is an MSNBC exclusive town hall with Secretary Hillary Clinton from the National Constitution Center in Philadelphia. Here now is Rachel Maddow, welcome

Rachel Maddow  0:18  
to Philadelphia. Welcome to our town hall with presidential candidate

Hillary Clinton. I'm Rachel Maddow. I could not be more excited to be here. There are five states voting tomorrow, including the big one here in Pennsylvania, Senator Sanders. Senator Sanders is down, but not out in the polling, but the polls today show him closing in on Secretary Clinton. Secretary Clinton is in the lead, but this thing is by no means sewn up. We have so much to talk about. It really is great to have you all here. This is going to be fun. Please join me in welcoming former Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton.

Speaker 2  1:02  
Here. Thank

Hillary Clinton  1:17  
you so much for doing this. I really appreciate it. I am happy to be here. This is great. You're expecting a big day tomorrow. Well, I always hope to do as well as I possibly can. We have been working really hard. I've got so many terrific friends and volunteers and organizers here in Pennsylvania and in the other four states. So we're going to work really hard till the polls close tomorrow.

Rachel Maddow  1:39  
We're doing these, these town halls tonight, before this great audience here in Philly, you and Senator Sanders, back to back at this point in the primary. I think a lot of people think no matter who gets the nomination, there is something that has changed in the Democratic primary because of this contest. I think a lot of people would describe it as Senator Sanders kind of putting his mark on the party that after this contest, the Democratic party may be more populist, more aggressive on economic inequality, maybe more progressive overall. Do you see it that way?

Hillary Clinton  2:10  
Well, I think that what we've had is a very spirited contest. Certainly we share a lot of the same goals. We have a commitment to doing something about inequality, more good jobs with rising incomes. We have a commitment to try to counter the much too heavy influence that money has, particularly by overturning Citizens United. So I think we diagnose the problem in very similar ways. But as I have said repeatedly, it's not enough just to diagnose the problem. You have to have solutions. You have to be able to demonstrate you can achieve results. And that's why throughout this campaign, I've been laying out plans. I've been talking about what I will do. I've been as specific as it's possible to be in a campaign, and I think voters respond to that. That's why, you know, I do have far more votes than anybody else on either side. So I think it's because people want not just to understand better what we think the problem is, but what are we going to do about it? Because at the end of the day, that's what the real outcome should be about.

Rachel Maddow  3:20  
When Senator Sanders has been asked about how this all ends, he seems to be saying now that even if you beat him in the primary, it's not necessarily a given that he will implore all of his supporters to go out and work for you. He says that he thinks that they'll support you if basically, you adopt some of his platform on the issues that are most important to him. He's specifically talked about Wall Street and some other things in his platform would does that make Does that make sense to you? Is that something you'd be open to is there, are there significant enough differences between you on what you'd like to do, for example, about Wall Street that that's a bridge too far?

Hillary Clinton  3:57  
Well, Rachel, let's look where we are right now. I've got 10 point 4 million votes. I have 2.7 million more votes, real people showing up to cast their vote, to express their opinion, than Senator Sanders. I have a bigger lead in pledged delegates than Sarah Obama when I ran against him in 2008 ever had over me. I am winning, and I'm winning because of what I stand for and what I've done and what my ideas are. So look, I think we have much more in common, and I want to unify the party, but my wall street plan is much more specific than his. We saw that when he couldn't even answer questions in the New York Daily News interview. I have laid out a very clear set of objectives about not just reining in the banks, because we already have Dodd Frank, which President Obama passed and signed, and I've said I will implement it, but I've gone further. He has yet. To join me in going after the shadow banking industry. So there are so many areas where I'm more specific, where I have a track record, where I explain what I will do, and I think that's why I have 2.7 million more votes than he does.

Rachel Maddow  5:14  
Am I right in in hearing that as basically you're saying that there's there's nothing you're going to do differently than you're already doing as a way to try to win over his supporters even at the end of the primary?

Hillary Clinton  5:25  
Well, let's look what happened in 2008 because that's the closest example. Then Senator Obama and I ran a really hard race. It was so much closer than the race right now between me and Senator Sanders, we had pretty much the same amount of popular vote. By some measures. I had slightly more popular vote. He had slightly more pledged delegates. We got to the end in June, and I did not put down conditions. I didn't say, You know what, if Senator Obama does X, Y and Z, maybe I'll support him. I said I am supporting Senator Obama, because no matter what our differences might be, they pale in comparison to the differences between us and the Republicans. That's what I did at that time, 40% of my supporters said they would not support him. So from the time I withdrew until the time I nominated him. I nominated him at the convention in Denver. I spent an enormous amount of time convincing my supporters to support him, and I'm happy to say the vast majority did. That is what I think one does. That is certainly what I did. And I hope that we will see the same this year.

Rachel Maddow  6:42  
That was June 7, 2008 when you get out of the race and endorse President Obama, June 7, 2016 will be the California Primary this year. Is that when you if you're ahead in the vote, if you're ahead and pledged delegates, way to

Speaker 2  7:00  
vote on a vote. Wait a minute. Look, I

Hillary Clinton  7:02  
have the greatest respect for Senator Sanders, but really what he and his supporters are now saying just doesn't add up. I have 2.7 million more votes than he has. I have more than 250 more pledged delegates. I'm very proud of the campaign that we have run and the support we have gotten, and of course, we're going to work together. I, as I said, I share a lot of the same goals. We are going to work together, but I am ahead. And let's start from that premise while we talk about what happens next. Okay, do you expect him to drop out June 7? That's up to him. I would never tell him what to do. You know, nobody told me. I concluded, after it was over in June that Senator Obama was going to be the nominee, and I didn't want to hurt him. I didn't want to keep this going. So I stood up and said that it's over, and I withdrew. And then I went to work to help get him elected, and I'm very glad I did. It was good for the country. It was the right thing to do.

Rachel Maddow  8:08  
A lot of Republicans had proverbial heart attacks this weekend when a gentleman by the name of Charles Koch, one of the billionaire Koch brothers, said that you very well might be a better president than either Donald Trump or Ted Cruz. Now I know that you do not want Charles Koch's endorsement, and you have said that, but it struck me that that might be a little bit of a preview of what is to come if Mr. Trump or Senator Cruz is nominated, I think a lot of Republicans will find them to be unacceptable as Republican nominees. If you were the Democratic nominee in that situation, do you have a plan to try to basically lobby for Republican votes? They're having a weird primary. Well, they are.

Hillary Clinton  8:49  
It's not over yet. We don't know what the final

Rachel Maddow  8:51  
could get really normal, real fast.

Hillary Clinton  8:56  
That would be worth saving. And you know, I tweeted, I really am not looking for endorsements from people who deny climate change and who have the views that the Koch brothers have had for so many years. So I'm going to stay focused on what I'm doing right now. I will let the Republicans come to an agreement. Maybe it won't happen before their convention in July as to who will be the nominee, because I have no idea what this latest alliance between Cruz and Kasich and everything will mean that's for them to sort out, but I'm going to keep making the case to the American people about what I think we need to do right now to Try to make sure we have broad based prosperity, that we create opportunities for every American. Get back to the basic bargain that I believe in. If you work hard, you should get ahead and stay ahead, and your family should be coming right along with you and focusing on education and health care and all the other issues that I've talked about and I've laid out Smith. Specific plans about, you know, I know that for a long time, you know, people were saying, Why is she raising all these plans? You know? I mean, my gosh, she has a plan for everything. Actually, I think when you run for president, you should tell people what you want to do. You shouldn't make promises you can't keep. You shouldn't just, you know, rant and rave with, you know, the Trump like demagoguery. You should tell people what you're going to do, because you should want people to hold you accountable for actually delivering, and that's what I've tried to do when you when

Rachel Maddow  10:27  
you say you shouldn't make promises that you can't keep. I know that you've reiterated that a number of times on the stump. Are you talking about Senator Sanders when you say that? Well, I think

Hillary Clinton  10:35  
that there certainly have been questions raised about the numbers not adding up for his college plan or his health care plan, and those are legitimate questions that people have to be able to ask and answer. And again, I would just, you know, refer to the New York Daily News interview, which was a very long interview, and certainly in New York, people read it very carefully, and it, you know, demonstrated that, you know, there was, there weren't a lot of answers to some of the hard questions that were asked on both domestic and foreign policy, but you'll have a chance, you know, to ask him about that. I think my goal is to keep talking about what I believe will work. And you know, I have said I will not raise taxes on middle class families because too many Americans haven't even yet recovered from the Great Recession, and I think we can do what we need to do without having to even look at that. Instead, we ought to be looking at making the wealthy pay their share of supporting our country. There's a lot of

Rachel Maddow  11:34  
good people here from the state of Pennsylvania and beyond who want to ask you questions, so I'm going to get out of the way. Our first question is from Bob weisbord. Mr. Weisbord is a councilman in Montgomery County, Pennsylvania. Hi, how are you

Speaker 3  11:46  
good evening? Secretary Clinton, get close to that microphone. Good evening. Secretary Clinton, good evening as a councilman, a volunteer councilman in a small borough of montgomery county. I'm particularly concerned about how the Democratic Party comes together after the primary and supports candidates down ballot. Will you say what role you would trust Senator Sanders in in a Clinton administration?

Hillary Clinton  12:11  
Well, I can't answer that because obviously I don't have the nomination yet. I'm not yet elected president, but here's what I will say I'm already raising money for Democrats up and down the ballot. I am dedicated to electing Democrats. It's something that I've spent many years doing. I am a Democrat, and I want to see more Democrats elected from, you know, the small boroughs in montgomery county, to Philadelphia to across the country. So you can count on me doing that, because I feel very strongly that we need to have a have a vital, dynamic Democratic Party. We need to recruit more people into it. We need to have a bigger pipeline so that more people are taking local positions and then moving up the ladder. And I want to be a very strong ally of elected Democrats across the country.

Rachel Maddow  13:02  
Can I ask you just to follow on to that? Said at the outset that a lot of people have talked about Senator Sanders kind of putting his mark on the Democratic Party, or at least raising the question of whether that's happening. How will you change the Democratic Party?

Hillary Clinton  13:14  
Well, I think that we have some good examples from our two most recent Democratic presidents, I happen to be, you know, looking hard at what my husband accomplished and what President Obama accomplished. And I know there are some who raise questions about how much you know, they could have done that maybe they didn't do, but I had a front row seat both with the Clinton administration and the Obama administration, and I know how hard they worked, and I know how much they got accomplished when they had a Democratic Congress. If you look at the first two years of my husband's administration, you look at the first two years of President Obama's administration, and then what happened? They pushed through a lot of changes. They pushed through regulation on guns, they pushed through the Affordable Care Act. They pushed through a lot the deficit reduction plan, the Dodd Frank regulations. What happened? Democrats didn't show up in the midterm elections. So here's how I want to change the Democratic Party. I want to be absolutely clear that when we have a Democratic president, we have to support that Democratic president, and we have to show up in mid term elections, and we have to elect governors and state legislatures and county officials, because that's how you have the kind of broad based political campaign and the momentum you need to get change at all levels. Right now, majority of states are run by Republican governors, and we see what they're doing on choice, on voting rights, on LGBT rights, it makes a difference. So my job will be to make sure that the Democratic Party is producing results through our elected officials, electing more Democrats and then convincing our supporters to turn. Out and vote in midterm elections. What's the Democratic Party doing wrong now that that's not happening, I think that we are a party that is very focused on presidential elections. That is just the way it seems to historically be changed. I do absolutely think it can be changed. I mean, I want to have the kind of emphasis on reaching out to voters and concerned citizens and elected officials. That doesn't just happen every four years. It happens every month of every year, and that is you take a lesson from what the Republicans have done. They're in trouble right now, but they never quit working on electing Republicans, on creating the kind of base that they need to put people into office and we need to be doing exactly the same thing.

Rachel Maddow  15:45  
We have lots more questions ahead for you. We are going to take a quick break. We'll be right back with Secretary Clinton.

Welcome back to our MSNBC town hall with Democratic front runner, Hillary Clinton.

Let's get to some more questions from our audience. We've got Eva lease palladi here. She's a Democrat, and she is undecided in this race.

Speaker 4  16:15  
Hi, Secretary Clinton. I was born and raised in Harlem, New York to parents who struggled and suffered from drug abuse and poverty, like many black women, most of the men in my family have been in jail. When I was born, my father held me and he said, you're going to get an education because, like you, he believed that education was the great equalizer. So I went to college, graduated with honors. I'm a practicing attorney, and despite the fact that I'm intelligent, articulate and ambitious, I face racial discrimination as a member of a profession that's almost 90% white. My question for you is, what as president, you would do, what initiatives, programs you would institute to address the racial and systemic racism that still exists and creates a glass ceiling for many 20 somethings like me.

Hillary Clinton  17:12  
Well, you are absolutely right. We are still facing and struggling with systemic racism. It's true in employment and promotion and other job opportunities. It's true in education. It's true in health care, it's true in the criminal justice system. That's why I talk about breaking down all the barriers. We have economic barriers, to be sure, but we have very entrenched barriers of discrimination. So here are some things that I think we have to do, number one, we have to talk about it more. And as a white person, I have to talk about it more and say that we are not a post racial society. We still struggle with racism, and it is. It is not only wrong, but it is holding us back, because for every young woman like yourself you know, ready, willing, able to get to work, who has held back, that not only hurts you, it hurts us. We want as productive a society as possible, so we have to enforce the civil rights laws. We have to use the bully pulpit, which I intend to use, to speak out about systemic racism every chance I get to talk to organizations like the American Bar Association in your case as a lawyer, to speak up and say, we still have work to do. When I was a young lawyer, I chaired the Commission on Women in the profession, because there's also a lot of sexism still, and even though we came up with a lot of good recommendations, we still haven't fully implemented them, and people are still not being treated fairly based on gender, based on race. So I want to enforce the laws. I want to make it clear that this is unacceptable. I want to speak out about it, and then I want to call people into the White House, because one of the great powers of the president is to be the convener in chief, bring people in and say, you've got to do more. And here are ideas that we have that have worked, excuse me, and you have to try to implement those. And that's exactly what I intend to do, because I don't want to see any young person held back because of any of these barriers. And so I'm going to try to tackle all of them head on. Our

Rachel Maddow  19:27  
next question is from Jared Anderson. Jared is a registered Democrat, and says he is leaning toward you.

Speaker 5  19:35  
Good evening. So your opponent has been a strong supporter of a $15 national minimum wage. You, on the other hand, have stood firm in your position that the federal minimum wage should be no more than $12 an hour in a city like Philadelphia, a significant number of citizens work minimum wage jobs. And struggle paycheck to paycheck just to make ends meet. So if you were elected president, Whatcott These workers as a basis for denying them the additional $3 an hour?

Hillary Clinton  20:11  
Well, first of all, let me say this, because I think the facts are important here. The facts are obviously critical. I have supported the fight for 15 I supported raising the minimum wage in Los Angeles, in Seattle, in New York City, and I stood with Governor Cuomo after he passed a $15 minimum wage increase in New York. So what I have said is I wanted to align myself with the Democratic members of the Senate who have come around to a $12 national level, but I want to go higher than that in any place that will go higher than that. That's why I have supported these cities and these states, and in fact, in New York, which Senator Sanders and others have called a model. It works the way that I think it should. You will get to $15 faster in the city than you will in the small towns and rural areas upstate in Philadelphia. You can probably get faster to 15 than you can in rural places in Pennsylvania. So my goal is to raise the bottom getting to 12, since we are at $7.25 would be a major accomplishment. And the real difference is not between Senator Sanders and myself. We both want to raise the minimum wage. The difference is with Republicans who do not and Donald Trump, who actually says that wages are too high in America, so I think our battle has to be with the Democrats to want to raise it, and are on the front lines doing so, and the Republicans who refuse to acknowledge the terrible struggles that people are facing. Because you can't if it's $7.25 $9.50 $10 that's not enough, so I'm going to continue to fight for 15. But I did go along with the other Democrats in the Senate who did a lot of work on this, because if you have different parts of the country where they're not going to move, they're not moving off of 725, let's get everybody to 12, and then index it to the cost of living so we don't have to keep voting on it. It just keeps going up, and that way, we will solve this problem once and for all.

Rachel Maddow  22:29  
Thank you. We've got a question now from Iran, benosye, who is a Democrat, who says he is undecided.

Speaker 6  22:38  
Hi, good evening, Secretary, Clinton. We've heard some ways in which we might expect Clinton presidency to be similar to President Obama's, but what are some points of differentiation that we might expect?

Hillary Clinton  22:49  
Great question. You know, I think I agree with a lot of what President Obama has done, and I don't think he gets the credit he deserves for all that he has accomplished, and in particular, saving our economy from Whatcott have been a Great Depression. People, I think, now don't really remember how bad off we were. So I do want to build but there are things that I want to go further on. I want to really make a big, big push on equal pay for women. This has to finally be accomplished. And, you know, I believe that if we start early and we are absolutely determined, we can make a big change there. I want to make a big push for early childhood education, because we can talk all we want about our schools, but if children come not prepared or able to learn. We're never going to close the achievement gap. I will make a big push for affordable college debt, free tuition, and to pay down student debt by allowing students to refinance their debt. And I want to get the government out of the business of making money off of lending money to students. I just disagree with that, and I will build on the Affordable Care Act, but I want to tackle the prescription drug costs and make sure that Medicare gets the authority to negotiate for lower drug costs, and those costs are then spread throughout our health care system, and I will make a very big push on mental health and addiction. We are not doing enough in either area, and we're paying a very big price. And then finally, let me just quickly say, when it comes to criminal justice reform, I want to build on some of the recommendations that President Obama's policing Commission has made, because I think that we've got to do more to retrain our police forces. We have to get best practices from those departments that have good records. We have to make sure that we deal with the what is called. Called the school to prison pipeline, and turn it into a cradle to college pipeline, and also go right after incarceration. And then I really support everything President Obama said he would do through regulation on guns. But we're going to start the very first day and tackle the gun lobby to try to reduce the outrageous number of people who are dying from gun violence in our country, and I will take that on.

Rachel Maddow  25:29  
Follow with you briefly on the on the guns issue, I was struck. You know, here in Philadelphia, the front page of the inquirer today is half about this race that you're in and half about another shooting, a shooting at a church in montgomery county. We just had eight people killed in Ohio, six people killed in Georgia. President Obama has said it's the greatest frustration of his presidency that he hasn't been able to do more to stop gun violence in this country. And I know what your platform is, but what do you think that you could get done that he has not been able to do?

Hillary Clinton  26:00  
Well, you know, in the last months, he has come out with some very tough regulations and getting those implemented. I hope he gets them done before he leaves, but I will certainly make sure they are. They're executive orders. They have to be, you know, reintroduced and signed with a new president that will give us a base we haven't had before to build on if we take back the Senate, which I believe we can. And you here in Pennsylvania have a real opportunity to help us take back the Senate by electing a Democrat. The Democrats have decided they will be led by Chuck Schumer, and Chuck Schumer has been one of the most effective legislators in taking on the gun lobby. He and I worked together to get the Brady bill passed way back in my husband's administration. So I think that it's the kind of issue you have to start early. You have to work on it every day, and we need to make it a voting issue. You know, we were talking about people not showing up in midterms? Well, that's when you can hold legislators, members of Congress, accountable with if they continue to be intimidated by the gun lobby. And indeed, here in Pennsylvania, and I see my friend Ed Rendell there, the legislature in Pennsylvania has passed some of the worst kinds of legislation favoring the gun lobby. It's just outrageous. And you have these killings going on in Philadelphia, and it wasn't just this weekend. Last weekend, 12 people were shot. Four people were killed. There was a man executed on the streets here in Philadelphia talking to somebody running for office. This is out of control. And if anything else were killing 33,000 Americans a year, we would all be working as hard as we could to save lives. I am determined. We're going to save lives, and we're going to do it by taking on the gun lobby and getting common sense gun safety measures, but we're also going to do it by addressing the gun violence culture too many young people in particular are turning to guns to settle disputes, grievances, resentments. We have got to help our young people understand guns are never an answer, and there have to be other ways, and that's going to take all of us, working in our schools, working through our churches and our houses of worship, we've got to break the grip of the gun culture on our young people, because the number one leading cause of death for young African American men are guns. It outranks the next nine together. So this is a this is a health issue, a safety issue, a cultural issue, and I'm going at it from the very first day. I'm going to keep talking about it, and we're going to make it clear that this has to be a voting issue. If you care about this issue, vote against people who give in to the NRA and the gun lobby all the time.

Rachel Maddow  29:00  
We've got much more with Secretary Hillary Clinton. Our Town Hall continues from Philadelphia. In just a moment, we'll be right back. We're

back in beautiful Philadelphia with former

Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton, who is joining us on the eve of another big primary day five states voting tomorrow, including Pennsylvania. Thank you again. This has been a lot of fun so far. Our audience has a lot more for you. We're going to start with Ashley Gorham, who is a registered Democrat, who is undecided. Hi, Ashley.

Speaker 3  29:39  
I'm going to lean in and vote for you tomorrow. Don't worry. But my question is, there's been a lot of talk about feminism and what it means to be a feminist during this election cycle, and how our feminism should influence our voting. So my question is, what does it mean to you to be a feminist?

Hillary Clinton  29:53  
Well, I believe I am a feminist because I believe that women deserve the same. Rights as men in every aspect of our economy and our society, here at home and around the world. And I have devoted, you know, I've devoted a lot of my public life to advocating for women's rights, being human rights, and making the case that we have to do everything we can through laws, regulations, culture, to change the still existing stereotypes that hold women back. And I think it's also really important to recognize that we have made progress, but we are still a long way from where we need to be. And I know that if you look at pay, for example, equal pay is still a problem, and it's a problem that gets worse as you get older. So young women coming right into the workforce often are paid pretty close to equal, if not actually equally. But within a few years, there begins to be a disparity, and it's hard to explain all of the difference, because people claim, well, it's, you know, women make different choices, and therefore they have a different kind of work life because of those choices, but that does not explain all of it. And I was with Lilly Ledbetter a few days ago outside of Philadelphia here, and she was talking about how she never knew that she was paid 40% less than the men doing exactly the same job in the factory that she worked in. Now, what did that mean? It meant that her family was cheated. It's not just a woman's issue. If you have a wife, a mother, a sister, a daughter who's working and they're not being treated fairly, the whole family suffers, but so does the whole economy, because we are a 70% consumption economy. The other thing Lily said, which really struck me, because she was paid less. She will be paid less when she gets Social Security, which she is now on. She is paid less because in her 401, K, not as much money was put in as was put in for everyone else. So this has pervasive effects on women's lives and their well being. So I think we have to keep hammering the point. You know, I remember when I came back from making my speech in Beijing, I went on one of the International radio programs that the United States sponsors, and we were taking call ins from around the world, and I got a call from the Middle East, and this man's voice said, What do you mean by saying that women have the same rights as men? And I said, Well, I want you to shut your eyes and imagine everything you do. What I mean is that every woman should have the same right to do everything you do, and that's how we need to really stand up and speak out. And we have to start early, because a lot of little girls, as they become teenagers, they begin to suffer all of these pressures on social media, on you know, you're not good enough, you're not pretty enough, you're not this, you're not that. Stop it. We need to build the confidence of our children, both girls and boys, to be able to go out into a complicated world and chart their own futures.

Rachel Maddow  33:32  
Canada has a new prime minister, Justin Trudeau. He promised when he took office that he would have a cabinet that was 50% women, right? And then he did it. He made good on his promise. Would you make that same

Hillary Clinton  33:45  
pledge? Well, I am going to have a cabinet that looks like America, and 50% of America is women. So that's a yes. I want

Rachel Maddow  33:57  
to introduce you now to

Speaker 2  34:00  
what did you say the lives of the women that are inverts right now,

Rachel Maddow  34:04  
this is outside of our format, but let me just rephrase the question for you. Let me tell me, tell me, if I get it right. Asking about women and families in family detention, immigration detention,

Hillary Clinton  34:13  
I'm against that. Absolutely. I'm against that. I've been against it for a long time. I've said we should end family detention. We should end private prisons and private detention centers. They are wrong. We should end raids and roundups. And when I'm President, we are going to get comprehensive immigration reform with a path to citizenship. So we will end all of these problems at at the time we are successful, I'm

Rachel Maddow  34:39  
going to bring in ED Morgan, do we have Ed Morgan here? Yes, we do. He's a registered Democrat. He's undecided. He's also a former letter carrier who now works as a political organizer for the letter carriers union. Mr. Morgan, thank you for being

Hillary Clinton  34:55  
here. Good. Hello. How are you? I'm great.

Speaker 4  34:56  
I'd like to ask your plan about keeping working class jobs and pencil. Vania from going overseas and out of state,

Hillary Clinton  35:03  
right? Well, I have a really robust jobs plan, and let me tell you about it, because it includes exactly what you're asking about. First, we need a much bigger investment in infrastructure. Jobs. They can't be exported. They have to be done in Pennsylvania. So roads, bridges, tunnels, roads, water systems, ports and airports, we can employ literally millions of people over a 10 year period. Secondly, we need to bring back advanced manufacturing to Pennsylvania. How are we going to do that? Change the incentives in the tax codes and override the incentives in the trade agreements that enable people to take jobs and move them overseas. Instead, have them bring jobs back, because what we're finding, we're finding that there are economic benefits to do that. So I want to incentivize them. And if any company in Pennsylvania ever took a penny of taxpayer dollar in tax abatements or grants or loans or anything that they got from the taxpayers. And if they move jobs out of sea, out overseas, they're going to have to pay all of that back before they are permitted to leave. We are also going to look at how we use clean renewable energy to create create more jobs, because we have to deal with that. And somebody is going to be the 21st century clean energy superpower. It's either going to be China, Germany or us. I want it to be us, because there will be a lot of jobs again that have to be done right here in America. And finally, look, I when I was a senator from New York, I stood up for a lot of workers, particularly union workers, who were being disadvantaged by unfair trade around the world, and I took after China, took after some of these other countries. I am absolutely committed to making sure that we don't let those kinds of unfair trade practices cost us jobs anymore. So I'm going to take a lot of actions that will prevent that kind of exodus of jobs and make those countries and those companies pay a price. That's the way to change their behavior, and that's what I intend to do.

Rachel Maddow  37:13  
We're going to take a quick break right now. We'll be right back with more. The former Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton, live in

Speaker 2  37:18  
Philadelphia, Bob,

Rachel Maddow  37:29  
welcome back to Philadelphia. You'd never believe what happens in the commercial

breaks here. Let's bring in William Cobb. Mr. Cobb is a Democrat. Says he's leaning toward Bernie Sanders. He works for an advocacy group helping former prisoners reenter society. Mr. Cobb is a former prisoner himself. He served time in the 1990s Mr. Cobb, thanks for

Speaker 7  37:49  
being here. Thank you for having me. Secretary Clinton, good seeing you again. Thank you. I really appreciate the fact that you are now championing criminal justice reform. However, what made the 1994 crime bill so powerful is that it was front loaded with an investment of $30 billion which put over 100,000 police on the streets, which gave states the money to build prisons across our country. So my question to you is, if you're elected President of the United States, are you willing to make billion dollar investments in restoring the lives of people and the communities that have been adversely impacted by the 1994 crime bill?

Hillary Clinton  38:32  
The answer is yes and no. The answer is yes and it's both on the front end, because we need more diversionary programs so that young kids don't get caught up in the criminal justice system in the first place. It also means addressing the systemic racism that I spoke with the young woman about because a young African American man is more likely to be arrested, charged, convicted and incarcerated for doing exactly the same thing as a young white man who doesn't suffer any of that. So we are going to focus on the front end, but we're also going to focus on the back end. We need to have a lot more done to try to release non violent offenders, low level offenders. We need to get them out of our prisons and jails, but then we've got to do something for them. And when you were introduced, it was said that you are working with ex offenders. I want us to have the best programs that are funded from the federal level to provide housing, job training, the kind of support that will enable young people to finish their education to be able to get back into society. And I've seen some excellent programs that are doing that. I visited one here in Philadelphia, impact services, where they are really working hard to help put the pieces together for people getting out of prison. But that has to be done at the federal level, and that requires a. A multi billion dollar investment, and it's worth it, because we need to be providing people with the services and support they deserve to be back in society, and then we need to restore voting rights for everybody, and I intend to do that as well. We just

Rachel Maddow  40:19  
got about one minute left. I have one quick question to ask. My gosh, I'm taking personal privilege and asking it myself. We have not had a president or a vice president who's had significant military experience since George H W Bush in 1992 I know you don't want to get ahead of yourself while you're still in this primary but is military experience something that you would consider to be a political asset in a potential running mate?

Hillary Clinton  40:42  
Well, of course, I mean, I think that our military serves with such distinction on behalf of our country. I've, over the years as a senator, as Secretary of State, gotten to know people at all ranks, particularly leaders of the various services. So yes, of course, it's an asset, and in the kind of complex, dangerous world we find ourselves in, we need all sorts of talent and experience. So whether it's in a vice president or members of a cabinet or in the White House staff, I want as broad a set of experiences that I can possibly draw together, because I'm someone who likes to listen to people who come at problems from different perspectives, even argue among themselves about it, because I think we get to a better solution, and that would certainly be how I'd go about it.

Rachel Maddow  41:33  
Former Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton, thank you so much for making time to do this today in

Philadelphia. I want to thank our great audience at the National constitutional Center here in Philadelphia. It's been a great night. Thank you. We're

Hillary Clinton  41:54  
going to work together. I, as I said, I share a lot of the same goals. We are going to work together, but I am ahead, and let's start from that premise while we talk about what happens next. Okay, do you expect him to drop out June 7? That's up to him. I would never tell him what to do. You know, nobody told me. I concluded, after it was over in June that Senator Obama was going to be the nominee, and I didn't want to hurt him. I didn't want to keep this going, so I stood up and said that it's over, and I withdrew. And then I went to work to help get him elected, and I'm very glad I did. It was good for the country. It was the right thing to do.

Rachel Maddow  42:35  
A lot of Republicans had proverbial heart attacks this weekend when a gentleman by the name of Charles Koch, one of the billionaire Koch brothers, said that you very well might be a better president than either Donald Trump or Ted Cruz. Now, I know that you do not want Charles Koch endorsement, and you have said that, but it struck me that that might be a little bit of a preview of what is to come if Mr. Trump or Senator Cruz is nominated, I think a lot of Republicans will find them to be unacceptable as Republican nominees. If you were the Democratic nominee in that situation, do you have a plan to try to basically lobby for Republican votes? They're having a weird primary. Well, they are.

Hillary Clinton  43:16  
It's not over yet. We don't know what the final

Rachel Maddow  43:18  
could get really normal, real fast.

Hillary Clinton  43:24  
That would be worth seeing. And, you know, I tweeted, I really am not looking for endorsements from people who deny climate change and who have the views that the Koch brothers have had for so many years. So I'm going to stay focused on what I'm doing right now. I will let the Republicans come to an agreement. Maybe it won't happen before their convention in July as to who will be the nominee, because I have no idea what this latest alliance between Cruz and Kasich and everything will mean that's for them to sort out. But I'm going to keep making the case to the American people about what I think we need to do right now to try to make sure we have broad based prosperity, that we create opportunities for every American. Get back to the basic bargain that I believe in. If you work hard, you should get ahead and stay ahead, and your family should be coming right along with you and focusing on education and health care and all the other issues that I've talked about and I've laid out specific plans about, you know, I know that for a long time, you know, people were saying, Why is she raising all these plans? You know? I mean, my gosh, she has a plan for everything. Actually, I think when you run for president, you should tell people what you want to do. You shouldn't make promises you can't keep. You shouldn't just, you know, rant and rave with, you know, the Trump like demagoguery. You should tell people what you're going to do, because you should want people to hold you accountable for actually delivering. And that's what I've tried to do

Rachel Maddow  44:54  
when you when you say you shouldn't make promises that you can't keep. I know that you've reiterated that a number of times on the stump. Are you talking? Talking about Senator Sanders when you say that, well, I think that there

Hillary Clinton  45:03  
certainly have been questions raised about the numbers not adding up for his college plan or his health care plan, and those are legitimate questions that people have to be able to ask and answer. And again, I would just refer to the New York Daily News interview, which was a very long interview, and certainly in New York, people read it very carefully, and it, you know, demonstrated that, you know, there was, there weren't a lot of answers to some of the hard questions that were asked on both domestic and foreign policy, but you'll have a chance, you know, to ask him about that. I think my goal is to keep talking about what I believe will work. And you know, I have said I will not raise taxes on middle class families because too many Americans haven't even yet recovered from the Great Recession. And I think we can do what we need to do without having to even look at that. Instead, we ought to be looking at making the wealthy pay their share of supporting our country. There's a lot of good

Rachel Maddow  46:01  
people here from the state of Pennsylvania and beyond who want to ask you questions. So I'm going to get out of the way. Our first question is from Bob weisbord. Mr. Weisbord is a councilman in Montgomery County, Pennsylvania. Hi, how are you good evening, Secretary Clinton, get close to that microphone.

Speaker 3  46:16  
Good evening. Secretary Clinton, good evening as a councilman, a volunteer councilman in a small borough of montgomery county. I'm particularly concerned about how the Democratic Party comes together after the primary and supports candidates down ballot. Will you say what role you would trust Senator Sanders in in a Clinton administration?

Hillary Clinton  46:38  
Well, I can't answer that, because obviously, I don't have the nomination yet. I'm not yet elected president, but here's what I will say, I'm already raising money for Democrats up and down the ballot. I am dedicated to electing Democrats. It's something that I've spent many years doing. I am a Democrat, and I want to see more Democrats elected from, you know, the small boroughs in montgomery county to Philadelphia to across the country. So you can count on me doing that, because I feel very strongly that we need to have a have a vital, dynamic Democratic Party. We need to recruit more people into it. We need to have a bigger pipeline so that more people are taking local positions and then moving up the ladder, and I want to be a very strong ally of elected Democrats across the country.

Rachel Maddow  47:29  
Can I ask you just to follow on to that? Said at the outset that a lot of people have talked about Senator Sanders kind of putting his mark on the Democratic Party, or at least raising the question of whether that's happening. How will you change the Democratic Party?

Hillary Clinton  47:42  
Well, I think that we have some good examples from our two most recent Democratic presidents. I happen to be, you know, looking hard at what my husband accomplished and what President Obama accomplished. And I know there are some who raise questions about how much you know, they could have done that. Maybe they didn't do but I had a front row seat both with the Clinton administration and the Obama administration, and I know how hard they worked, and I know how much they got accomplished when they had a Democratic Congress. If you look at the first two years of my husband's administration, you look at the first two years of President Obama's administration. And then what happened? They pushed through a lot of changes. They pushed through regulation on guns, they pushed through the Affordable Care Act. They pushed through a lot the deficit reduction plan, the Dodd Frank regulations. What happened? Democrats didn't show up in the midterm elections. So here's how I want to change the Democratic Party. I want to be absolutely clear that when we have a Democratic president, we have to support that Democratic president, and we have to show up in midterm elections, and we have to elect governors and state legislatures and county officials, because that's how you have the kind of broad based political campaign and the momentum you need to get change at all levels right now, majority of states are run by Republican governors, and we see what they're doing, on choice, on voting rights, on LGBT rights. It makes a difference. So my job will be to make sure that the Democratic Party is producing results through our elected officials, electing more Democrats and then convincing our supporters to turn out and vote in midterm elections. What's the Democratic Party doing wrong now that that's not happening, I think that we are a party that is very focused on presidential elections. That is just the way it seems to historically be changed. I do absolutely think it can be changed. I mean, I want to have the kind of emphasis on reaching out to voters and concerned citizens and elected officials that doesn't just happen every four years. It happens every month of every year, and that is, you take a lesson from what the Republicans have done. They're in trouble right now. But they never quit working on electing Republicans, on creating the kind of base that they need to put people into office, and we need to be doing exactly the same thing. We have

Rachel Maddow  50:13  
lots more questions. And for you, we are going to take a quick break. We'll be right back with Secretary Clinton. You Jeff,

welcome back to Philadelphia. Welcome back to our MSNBC. John Hall with Democratic front runner, Hillary Clinton.

Let's get to some more questions from our audience. We've got Eva lease palladi here. She's a Democrat, and she is undecided in this race.

Speaker 4  50:43  
Hi, Secretary Clinton. I was born and raised in Harlem, New York to parents who struggled and suffered from drug abuse and poverty. Like many black women, most of the men in my family have been in jail when I was born. My father held me, and he said, you're going to get an education because, like you, he believed that education was the great equalizer. So I went to college, graduated with honors. I'm a practicing attorney, and despite the fact that I'm intelligent, articulate and ambitious, I faced racial discrimination as a member of a profession that's almost 90% white. My question for you is, what, as President, you would do, what initiatives, programs you would institute to address the racial and systemic racism that still exists and creates a glass ceiling for many 20 somethings like me? Well, you

Hillary Clinton  51:39  
are absolutely right. We are still facing and struggling with systemic racism. It's true in employment and promotion and other job opportunities. It's true in education, it's true in health care, it's true in the criminal justice system. That's why I talk about breaking down all the barriers. We have economic barriers, to be sure, but we have very entrenched barriers of discrimination. So here are some things that I think we have to do. Number one, we have to talk about it more. And as a white person, I have to talk about it more and say that we are not a post racial society. We still struggle with racism, and it is. It is not only wrong, but it is holding us back, because for every young woman like yourself, you know, ready, willing, able to get to work, who is held back that not only hurts you, it hurts us. We want as productive a society as possible. So we have to enforce the civil rights laws. We have to use the bully pulpit, which I intend to use, to speak out about systemic racism. Every chance I get to talk to organizations like the American Bar Association, in your case as a lawyer, to speak up and say, we still have work to do. When I was a young lawyer, I chaired the Commission on Women in the profession, because there's also a lot of sexism still, and even though we came up with a lot of good recommendations, we still haven't fully implemented them, and people are still not being treated fairly based on gender, based on race. So I want to enforce the laws. I want to make it clear that this is unacceptable. I want to speak out about it, and then I want to call people into the White House, because one of the great powers of the president is to be the convener in chief, bring people in and say, you've got to do more. And here are ideas that we have that have worked, excuse me, and you have to try to implement those, and that's exactly what I intend to do, because I don't want to see any young person held back because of any of these barriers, and so I'm going to try to tackle all of them head on. Our next

Rachel Maddow  53:55  
question is from Jared Anderson. Jared is a registered Democrat, and says he is leaning toward you.

Speaker 5  54:03  
Good evening. So your opponent has been a strong supporter of a $15 national minimum wage. You, on the other hand, have stood firm in your position that the federal minimum wage should be no more than $12 an hour in a city like Philadelphia, a significant number of citizens work minimum wage jobs and struggle paycheck to paycheck just to make ends meet. So if you are elected president, Whatcott These workers is the basis for denying them the additional $3 an hour?

Hillary Clinton  54:39  
Well, first of all, let me say this because I think the facts are important here. The facts are obviously critical. I have supported the fight for 15. I supported raising the minimum wage in Los Angeles, in Seattle, in New York City, and I stood with Governor Cuomo after he passed a 15. Dollar minimum wage increase in New York. So what I have said is I wanted to align myself with the Democratic members of the Senate who have come around to a $12 national level, but I want to go higher than that in any place that will go higher than that. That's why I have supported these cities and these states, and in fact, in New York, which Senator Sanders and others have called a model, it works the way that I think it should. You will get to $15 faster in the city than you will in the small towns and rural areas upstate in Philadelphia, you can probably get faster to 15 than you can in rural places in Pennsylvania. So my goal is to raise the bottom getting to 12, since we are at $7.25 would be a major accomplishment. And the real difference is not between Senator Sanders and myself, we both want to raise the minimum wage. The difference is with Republicans who do not and Donald Trump, who actually says that wages are too high in America. So I think our battle has to be with the Democrats to want to raise it, and are on the front lines doing so, and the Republicans who refuse to acknowledge the terrible struggles that people are facing, because you can't if it's $7.25 $9.50 $10 that's not enough. So I'm going to continue to fight for 15 but I did go along with the other Democrats in the Senate who did a lot of work on this, because if you have different parts of the country where they're not going to move. They're not moving off of 725, let's get everybody to 12, and then index it to the cost of living. So we

Speaker 1  56:49  
this is an MSNBC exclusive town hall with Secretary Hillary Clinton from the National Constitution Center in Philadelphia. Here now is Rachel Maddow, Hi, welcome

Rachel Maddow  57:06  
to Philadelphia. Welcome to our town hall with presidential candidate Hillary Clinton. I'm Rachel Maddow. I could not be more excited to be here. There are five states voting tomorrow, including the big one here in Pennsylvania,

Senator Sanders,

Speaker 2  57:22  
the senator

Rachel Maddow  57:25  
Sanders, Senator Sanders is down, but not out in the polling, but the polls today show him closing in on Secretary Clinton. Secretary Clinton is in the lead, but this thing is by no means sewn up. We have so much to talk about. It really is great to have you all here. This is going to be fun. Please join me in welcoming former Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton.

Speaker 2  58:02  
You thank

Rachel Maddow  58:06  
you so much for doing this. I really appreciate

Hillary Clinton  58:07  
it. I am happy to be here. This is great. You are expecting a big day tomorrow. Well, I always hope to do as well as I possibly can. We have been working really hard. I've got so many terrific friends and volunteers and organizers here in Pennsylvania and in the other four states. So we're going to work really hard till the polls close tomorrow.

Rachel Maddow  58:27  
We're doing these, these town halls tonight before this great audience here in Philly. You and Senator Sanders, back to back at this point in the primary, I think a lot of people think no matter who gets the nomination, there is something that has changed in the Democratic primary because of this contest. I think a lot of people would describe it as Senator Sanders kind of putting his mark on the party, that after this contest, the Democratic party may be more populist, more aggressive on economic inequality, maybe more progressive overall. Do you see it that way?

Hillary Clinton  58:59  
Well, I think that what we've had is a very spirited contest. Certainly we share a lot of the same goals. We have a commitment to doing something about inequality, more good jobs with rising incomes. We have a commitment to try to counter the much too heavy influence that money has, particularly by overturning Citizens United. So I think we diagnose the problem in very similar ways. But as I have said repeatedly, it's not enough just to diagnose the problem. You have to have solutions. You have to be able to demonstrate you can achieve results. And that's why throughout this campaign, I've been laying out plans, I've been talking about what I will do. I've been as specific as it's possible to be in a campaign, and I think voters respond to that. That's why, you know, I do have far more votes than anybody else on either side. So I think it's because people want not just to. To understand better what we think the problem is. But what are we going to do about it? Because at the end of the day, that's what the real outcome should be about.

Rachel Maddow  1:00:08  
When Senator Sanders has been asked about how this all ends, he seems to be saying now that even if you beat him in the primary, it's not necessarily a given, that he will implore all of his supporters to go out and work for you. He says that he thinks that they'll support you if basically, you adopt some of his platform on the issues that are most important to him. He's specifically talked about Wall Street and some other things in his platform would does that make Does that make sense to you? Is that something that you'd be open to is there, are there significant enough differences between you on what you'd like to do, for example, about Wall Street that that's a bridge too far.

Hillary Clinton  1:00:46  
Well, Rachel, let's look where we are right now. I've got 10 point 4 million votes. I have 2.7 million more votes real people showing up to cast their vote, to express their opinion, than Senator Sanders. I have a bigger lead in pledged delegates than Sarah Obama when I ran against him in 2008 ever had over me. I am winning, and I'm winning because of what I stand for and what I've done and what my ideas are. So look, I think we have much more in common, and I want to unify the party, but my wall street plan is much more specific than his. We saw that when he couldn't even answer questions in the New York Daily News interview. I have laid out a very clear set of objectives about not just reining in the banks, because we already have Dodd Frank, which President Obama passed and signed, and I've said I will implement it, but I've gone further. He has yet to join me in going after the shadow banking industry. So there are so many areas where I'm more specific, where I have a track record, where I explain what I will do, and I think that's why I have 2.7 million more votes than he does.

Rachel Maddow  1:02:03  
Am I right in in hearing that as basically you saying that there's there's nothing you're going to do differently than you're already doing as a way to try to win over his supporters even at the end of the primary? Well, let's look

Hillary Clinton  1:02:15  
what happened in 2008 because that's the closest example. Then Senator Obama and I ran a really hard race. It was so much closer than the race right now, between me and Senator Sanders, we had pretty much the same amount of popular vote. By some measures, I had slightly more popular vote. He had slightly more pledged delegates. We got to the end in June, and I did not put down conditions. I didn't say, You know what, if Senator Obama does X, Y and Z, maybe I'll support him. I said I am supporting Senator Obama, because no matter what our differences might be, they pale in comparison to the differences between us and the Republicans. That's what I did. At that time, 40% of my supporters said they would not support him. So from the time I withdrew until the time I nominated him, I nominated him at the convention in Denver, I spent an enormous amount of time convincing my supporters to support him. And I'm happy to say the vast majority did. That is what I think one does. That is certainly what I did. And I hope that we will see the same this

Rachel Maddow  1:03:30  
year. That was June 7, 2008 when you get out of the race and endorse President Obama, June 7, 2016 will be the California Primary this year. Is that when you if you're ahead in the vote, if you're ahead in pledge delegates, look, I have

Hillary Clinton  1:03:52  
the greatest respect for Senator Sanders, but really what he and his supporters are now saying just doesn't add up. I have 2.7 million more votes than he has. I have more than 250 more pledged delegates. I'm very proud of the campaign that we have run and the support we have gotten. And of course, we don't have to keep voting on it. It just keeps going up, and that way, we will solve this problem once and for all.

Rachel Maddow  1:04:24  
Thank you. We've got a question now from Iran benishe, who is a Democrat, who says he is undecided.

Speaker 6  1:04:32  
Hi, good evening, Secretary Clinton. We've heard some ways in which we might expect Clinton presidency to be similar to President Obama's, but what are some points of differentiation that we might expect?

Hillary Clinton  1:04:43  
Great question. You know, I think I agree with a lot of what President Obama has done, and I don't think he gets the credit he deserves for all that he has accomplished, and in particular, saving our economy from Whatcott been a great depression, people. I think now. Don't really remember how bad off we were, so I do want to build but there are things that I want to go further on. I want to really make a big, big push on equal pay for women. This has to finally be accomplished. And, you know, I believe that if we start early and we are absolutely determined we can make a big change there. I want to make a big push for early childhood education, because we can talk all we want about our schools, but if children come not prepared or able to learn, we're never going to close the achievement gap. I will make a big push for affordable college, debt free tuition and to pay down student debt by allowing students to refinance their debt. And I want to get the government out of the business of making money off of lending money to students. I just disagree with that, and I will build on the Affordable Care Act, but I want to tackle the prescription drug costs and make sure that Medicare gets the authority to negotiate for lower drug costs, and those costs are then spread throughout our health care system. And I will make a very big push on mental health and addiction we are not doing enough in either area, and we're paying a very good price. And then, you know, finally, let me just quickly say, when it comes to criminal justice reform, I want to build on some of the recommendations that President Obama's policing Commission has made, because I think that we've got to do more to retrain our police forces. We have to get best practices from those departments that have good records. We have to make sure that we deal with the what is called the school to prison pipeline, and turn it into a cradle to college pipeline, and also go right after incarceration, and then I really support everything President Obama said he would do through regulation on guns. But we're going to start the very first day and tackle the gun lobby to try to reduce the outrageous number of people who are dying from gun violence in our country. And I will take that on.

Rachel Maddow  1:07:24  
Follow with you briefly on the on the guns issue. I was struck. You know, here in Philadelphia, the front page of the inquirer today is half about this race that you're in and half about another shooting, shooting in a church in montgomery county. We just had eight people killed in Ohio. Six people killed in Georgia. President Obama has said it's the greatest frustration of his presidency that he hasn't been able to do more to stop gun violence in this country. And I know what your platform is, but what do you think that you could get done that he has not been able to

Hillary Clinton  1:07:54  
do? Well, you know, in the last months, he has come out with some very tough regulations and getting those implemented. I hope he gets them done before he leaves, but I will certainly make sure they are. They're executive orders. They have to be, you know, reintroduced and signed with a new president that will give us a base we haven't had before to build on if we take back the Senate, which I believe we can, and you here in Pennsylvania have a real opportunity to help us take back the Senate by electing a Democrat. The Democrats have decided they will be led by Chuck Schumer, and Chuck Schumer has been one of the most effective legislators in taking on the gun lobby. He and I worked together to get the Brady bill passed way back in my husband's administration. So I think that it's the kind of issue you have to start early. You have to work on it every day, and we need to make it a voting issue. You know, we were talking about people not showing up in midterms. Well, that's when you can hold legislators, members of Congress accountable with if they continue to be intimidated by the gun lobby. And indeed, here in Pennsylvania, and I see my friend Ed Rendell there, the legislature in Pennsylvania has passed some of the worst kinds of legislation favoring the gun lobby. It's just outrageous. And you have these killings going on in Philadelphia, and it wasn't just this weekend. Last weekend, 12 people were shot, Four people were killed. There was a man executed on the streets here in Philadelphia talking to somebody running for office. This is out of control. And if anything else were killing 33,000 Americans a year, we would all be working as hard as we could to save lives. I am determined we're going to save lives, and we're going to do it by taking on the gun lobby and getting common sense gun safety measures, but we're also going to do it by addressing the gun violence culture. Too many young people in particular are turning to guns to settle. All disputes, grievances, resentments. We have got to help our young people understand guns are never an answer, and there have to be other ways, and that's going to take all of us, working in our schools, working through our churches and our houses of worship. We've got to break the grip of the gun culture on our young people, because the number one leading cause of death for young African American men are guns. It outranks the next nine together. So this is a this is a health issue, a safety issue, a cultural issue, and I'm going at it from the very first day. I'm going to keep talking about it, and we're going to make it clear that this has to be a voting issue. If you care about this issue, vote against people who give in to the NRA and the gun lobby all the time.

Rachel Maddow  1:10:55  
We've got much more with Secretary Hillary Clinton. Our Town Hall continues from Philadelphia in just a moment, we'll be right back. We're

back in beautiful Philadelphia with former Secretary of State, Hillary

Clinton, who is joining us on the eve of another big primary day, five states voting tomorrow, including Pennsylvania. Thank you again. This has been a lot of fun so far. Our audience has a lot more for you. We're going to start with Ashley Gorham, who is a registered Democrat, who is undecided. Hi, Ashley.

Speaker 3  1:11:33  
I'm going to lean in and vote for you tomorrow. Don't worry. My question is, there's been a lot of talk about feminism and what it means to be a feminist during this election cycle, and how our feminism should influence our voting. So my question is, what does it mean to you to be a feminist?

Hillary Clinton  1:11:47  
Well, I believe I am a feminist because I believe that women deserve the same rights as men in every aspect of our economy and our society, here at home and around the world, and I have devoted, you know, I've devoted a lot of my public life to advocating for women's rights, being human rights, and making the case that we have to do everything we can through laws, regulations, culture, to change the still existing stereotypes that hold women back. And I think it's also really important to recognize that we have made progress, but we are still a long way from where we need to be, and I know that if you look at pay, for example, equal pay is still a problem, and it's a problem that gets worse as you get older. So young women coming right into the workforce often are paid pretty close to equal, if not actually equally, but within a few years, there begins to be a disparity, and it's hard to explain all of the difference, because people claim, well, it's, you know, women make different choices, and therefore they have a different kind of work life because of those choices. But that does not explain all of it. And I was with Lilly Ledbetter a few days ago outside of Philadelphia here, and she was talking about how she never knew that she was paid 40% less than the men doing exactly the same job in the factory that she worked in. Now. What did that mean? It meant that her family was cheated. It's not just a woman's issue. If you have a wife, a mother, a sister, a daughter who is working and they are not being treated fairly, the whole family suffers, but so does the whole economy, because we are a 70% consumption economy. The other thing Lily said, which really struck me, because she was paid less, she will be paid less when she gets Social Security, which she is now on, she is paid less because in her 401, K, not as much money was put in as was put in for everyone else. So this has pervasive effects on women's lives and their well being. So I think we have to keep hammering the point. You know, I remember when I came back from making my speech in Beijing, I went on one of the International radio programs that the United States sponsors, and we were taking call ins from around the world, and I got a call from the Middle East, and this man's voice said, What do you mean by saying that women have the same rights as men. And I said, Well, I want you to shut your eyes and imagine everything you do. What I mean is that every woman should have the same right to do everything you do, and that's how we need to really stand up and speak out, and we have to start early, because a lot of little girls. Girls, as they become teenagers, they begin to suffer all of these pressures on social media, on you know, you're not good enough, you're not pretty enough, you're not this, you're not that. Stop it. We need to build the confidence of our children, both girls and boys, to be able to go out into a complicated world and chart their own futures.

Rachel Maddow  1:15:26  
Canada has a new prime minister, Justin Trudeau. He promised when he took office that he would have a cabinet that was 50% women, right? And then he did it. He made good on his promise. Would you make that same pledge?

Hillary Clinton  1:15:40  
Well, I am going to have a cabinet that looks like America, and 50% of America is women, right? So that's a yes. I

Rachel Maddow  1:15:52  
want to introduce you now to detention.

Speaker 2  1:15:55  
What did you say?

Rachel Maddow  1:15:58  
This is outside of our format, but let me just rephrase the question for you. Let me tell me, tell me, if I get it right. Asking about women and families in family detention and immigration

Hillary Clinton  1:16:07  
detention, I'm against that. Absolutely I'm against that. I've been against it for a long time. I've said we should end family detention. We should end private prisons and private detention centers. They are wrong. We should end raids and roundups. And when I'm President, we are going to get comprehensive immigration reform with a path to citizenship, so we will end all of these problems at at the time we are successful, I'm

Rachel Maddow  1:16:33  
going to bring in ED Morgan. Do we have Ed Morgan here? Yes, we do. He's a registered Democrat. He's undecided. He's also a former letter carrier who now works as a political organizer for the letter carriers union. Mr. Morgan, thank you for being here. Good. Hello. How are you? I'm great.

Speaker 4  1:16:51  
I'd like to ask your plan about keeping working class jobs in Pennsylvania from going overseas and out of state, right? Well, I

Hillary Clinton  1:16:58  
have a really robust jobs plan, and let me tell you about it, because it includes exactly what you're asking about. First, we need a much bigger investment in infrastructure. Jobs. They can't be exported. They have to be done in Pennsylvania. So roads, bridges, tunnels, roads, water systems, ports and airports. We can employ literally millions of people over a 10 year period. Secondly, we need to bring back advanced manufacturing to Pennsylvania. How are we going to do that? Change the incentives in the tax codes and override the incentives in the trade agreements that enable people to take jobs and move them overseas instead have them bring jobs back. Because what we're finding, we're finding that there are economic benefits to do that, so I want to incentivize them. And if any company in Pennsylvania ever took a penny of taxpayer dollar in tax abatements or grants or loans or anything that they got from the taxpayers, and if they move jobs out of sea, out overseas, they're going to have to pay all of that back before they are permitted to leave, we are also going to look at how we use clean renewable energy to create create more jobs, because we have to deal with that. And somebody is going to be the 21st century clean energy superpower. It's either going to be China, Germany or us. I want it to be us, because there'll be a lot of jobs again that have to be done right here in America. And finally, look, I when I was a senator from New York, I stood up for a lot of workers, particularly union workers, who were being disadvantaged by unfair trade around the world. And I took after China, took after some of these other countries, I am absolutely committed to making sure that we don't let those kinds of unfair trade practices cost us jobs anymore. So I'm going to take a lot of actions that will prevent that kind of exodus of jobs and make those countries and those companies pay a price. That's the way to change their behavior, and that's what I intend to do.

Rachel Maddow  1:19:07  
We're going to take a quick break on.

